test adventure in a very different
climate the frozen wastes of Norway
where I went with D company of the third
Battalion of the parachute regiment on
Monday I spent the night in a snow hole
we made ourselves and with temperatures
outside reaching minus 30
it was pretty chilly but the next
morning I was about to get even colder
for long distances the Paris hitch a
ride behind their vehicles it's cold
skiing and corporal Jim Taylor showed me
how it's done
scooped up on top the drop boom twist
over and that's it get the ski basket
under your armpits go ski on to the rope
twist it over like that right ready to
start going alright ready when you were
okay boys thumbs up let's go oh we're
off
Oh
and why would you need this I in no way
it's amazing your legs are straining to
keep balance today I warm but because
your hands are just told you on their
cold
the journey was fun what we were heading
for definitely wasn't the Paris call
this part of their training ice breaking
Diane had done it with the Royal Marines
so I sort of knew what I was in for as
Captain Andy Jackson began his briefing
why are you deployed in Norway you
frequently required to cross areas of
frozen ice rivers lakes ponds and
streams they're not shown on the map if
the cover with deep snow you may not
even know that you're doing it but sure
the worst case happened somebody goes
through that ice then you need to know
how to react you need to know how to
react instinctively
and quickly take a firm grip with the
poles not with the wrist loops and last
but not least step onto the skis and
once I'm happy for you to go I will give
you the thumbs up your eyes were using
here is very thick it's proximately 18
inches to 2 foot thick if you do this on
a stream the ice may be very thin the
idea is to spread your bodyweight as low
and that's why that's possible if you
don't do right you'll be in there and
you'll stay in there too you do get it
right once you've gone in that Lake you
will find that within a very short space
of time your body stops working and your
brain it becomes very none these drills
need to be instinctive what are you
doing the first 30 seconds that water
it's basically going decide where you're
going to come out in one piece or not
okay if you look in now called Javy will
give you a demo
okay he's a gettysburger get out quick
as he can push it out he ducks under
okay it gets its bowls out he holds it
calls above the baskets one on each hand
and he's bagging himself out pull
himself up his upper body good
you roll in the snow that'll take some
of the water off you if you particularly
switched oh I call Javy okay what's he
rolled in the snow
you'll be later to get changed straight
into the tank that looks like a lot of
fun I've been told by a little bird in
my ear if you're over 35 it's optional
if you want to jump in there for a
soldier because it's such an intense
shock to your body it could give you a
heart attack so Osher was over 35 see in
a minute
out I'll be lying if I said I
wasn't frightened in the moment
absolutely freezing and this train
soldiers here struggling to get out
remember their name and what's the worst
thing about it what's the initial shock
really take your breath away
yeah just going to pour that burger
notes in mushroom heads and guys
disorientated soon they get into those
yeah they're not a shock just smashing
down so quickly though yeah it does so
speed is of the essence get in you can
get out
come on
well it was absolutely amazing believe
it or not it's not the coal that hurts
it's the fact that you can't speak
properly my name now is two of them I
couldn't remember date of birth once
you're in there it's just like an
immense pressure pushing on your chest
and you just can't get anything out and
your brain just starts to norm up Lana
did it once is enough
never again I'm gonna get changed now